One of the many points of hope in these changing times
are the number of medical doctors who are coming
to realize that drugs and surgery
do not constitute wellness.
One such doctor is Jacob Teitelbaum,
author of the book Pain Free 1, 2, 3.
Suffering from fibromyalgia in his days as a medical intern,
Jacob had to find his own way to becoming pain free
when his colleagues couldn't help him.
Today he's an outspoken proponent for turning
to natural substances as a first approach
to living without pain.
As I mentioned earlier, it's so hard for people to tell
what's going on, because everybody's trying
to sell them something.
There's nothing wrong with money,
you know, the pharmaceutical industry is doing their job.
They're trying to shut out all the other competition
so they can make a buck, and that's their job.
It's not their job to promote natural health products.
But my job is to represent the patient.
And because of that, I have a promise
that I do not take money from any companies,
pharmaceutical or natural.
And for the products I make,
100% of the royalties go to charity,
which means if I recommend a product,
I don't make a penny either way.
You know, people go to the health food store,
they can buy one, the other, or the pharmaceutical.
But again, I represent the patient.
So let's talk about that.
A lot of your patients have pain, pain is your specialty.
Let's talk about what causes pain
and we're going to talk about what makes it go away,
why we have it, and then we'll go into a little bit
of the hammer verses screwdriver approach.
(laughing)
Absolutely, because again, I had chronic fibro pain
with fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndrome
back in 1975.
It actually knocked me out of medical school
for the year and left me homeless.
My wakeup service used to be a police boot in my side.
And the police were very sweet about it,
but it was time to get up (chuckles) and move along.
Because my dad was dead I was supporting myself
and I just rolled through college in 2 and a half years.
And I was saving just enough credits to keep my scholarship
for the third, I was rolling through med school
and a family crisis crashed and burned.
So I know what it's like to have it.
But I've also spent the last 26 years
treating chronic pain, and what we've learned
is pain is not the enemy.
If you have a hand on the stove,
you don't want to wait to smell burning flesh
to know that you got to move it.
It lets you know early that you need
to pay attention to something.
In that case, get their hand off the stove.
It's like the oil light on your dashboard.
It says something desperately needs attention.
Now if you go to the doctor and say that the oil lights
on the dashboard, he'll say, "That's pretty annoying,"
put a Band Aid over the oil light, and say,
"Is that better?"
(woman laughs)
And then you wonder why people burn out their bodies
and burn out their motors in that case.
I call pain the SHIN light.
It tells you, usually, that there's an issue with sleep,
hormonal problems, infections, inflammation,
impingement, or nutritional deficiencies.
Now those are the four key metabolic areas.
Now certainly, if you have a broken arm or something
that's pretty obvious, but the things that you can't
really tell, it's usually one of those four SHIN areas.
And in fact, a double-blind placebo-controlled study
done on people with widespread pain and fibromyalgia
showed that by the end of three months of treating SHIN,
at the end of 99 days, the majority of people were pain-free
and no longer even qualified as having fibromyalgia.
So when you treat the cause of pain,
you put oil in your car, the oil light goes out.
You treat SHIN, the pain light goes out
and people feel better.
So better to treat the underlying causes of pain.
So pain is our indicator,
and just as a tiny aside,
what is it about the American public
that feels as though we deserve a pain-free life
no matter what we do to our bodies?
Isn't that somewhat a sense of entitlement,
or certainly delusional?
Well, I think it's an appropriate sense of entitlement.
We deserve to be pain-free.
There's no assured punishment or anything like that,
or even right or wrong here.
It's a matter of what works and what doesn't work.
So if something doesn't work,
it's not like you're supposed to suffer.
It's your body's way of saying, "Help."
So the bottom line is you're entitled to be pain-free,
and in treating over 3000 people with chronic pain
in the last 26 years, it's a tiny, tiny, tiny,
tiny fraction of people that we can't get
good, solid pain relief.
And you know, I think it's never acceptable
to leave somebody in pain.
I don't think it's a healthy thing.
I agreewith you, but if you're not taking care
of yourself, if you treat your body badly,
and you end up with pain and you think you can
put a Band Aid on it, well, that's delusional.
Well, see, that's the thing, your body will tell you
if you're not giving it enough sleep,
the average night's sleep 100 years ago
was nine hours a night.
We're now down to less than seven.
And if you think about taking a 25% pay cut,
that's what it's like to your body in terms of energy
when you cut back your sleep that much.
That's when tissue repair goes on,
so you need to get your sleep.
Let's talk about that for just a second,
about sleep specifically and the hours
where your body is repairing during sleep.
Well, deep sleep, there's three main ways
you can make growth hormones.
You know, people are taking growth hormone shots
that I don't recommend, and they're paying 15 grand a year.
But you make growth hormone three main ways,
exercise, deep sleep, and sex.
So I think all three of them are good.
Deep sleep is the easy one,
that's when you make growth hormone release.
So if you don't get enough deep sleep,
that's when tissue repair goes on.
The growth hormone also leaves you skinny and young.
It's called the Fountain of Youth hormone.
And does that happen during a certain
type of sleep pattern or a certain time of the night?
It happens at stage three, four sleep.
That's why most sleeping pills are a problem.
The benzodiazepine, Valium probably, kind of things,
because they keep you in light sleep,
so you're unconscious,
but you don't recharge your batteries.
And that's why things that restore deep sleep,
suntheanine, theanine which comes from green tea,
is an excellent natural product that's been shown
to keep you in deep sleep.
It will not leave you stupid the next day
'cause it's not gonna sedate you,
but it simply calms you and keeps you in deep sleep.
So there's natural ways that people can get excellent
sleep support, wild lettuce, Jamaican dogwood, hops,
you know, drink a beer.
(laughs)
We're gonna drink a beer, okay,
so that's the sleep element of how we begin
the healing process in our bodies, right?
And now let's talk about the other areas
that you mentioned earlier.
Well nutrition is the foundation
of energy production and health.
Your body is remarkable at making the best
of the tools it has so you can achieve balance,
but if it doesn't have the basic building blocks,
you're out of luck.
So the American diet gets an average of almost 140 pounds
of sugar per person per year added in to it.
Another 18% of calories from white flour.
That's a third of your calories that are almost devoid
of vitamins and minerals.
And they create inflammation as well, don't they?
And many of things aggravate, if you don't have enough
fish oil or omega-3's, and we used to get 12 times as many
omega-3's as omega-6's, now we're down to one to one,
and those are very inflammatory.
So diet clearly plays a role in inflammation.
Also in fatigue, in pain, in degenerative diseases,
and how you feel and move.
So just with sugar and white flour you've lost a third
of your nutrients, and the body, the diet only has
about a 10% leeway--
So we lost a quarter of our sleep,
we've lost a third of our nutrients,
and in fact have put nutrients in which are causing harm.
Yes.
Not just devoid,
but causing harm.
Exactly.
It used to be goiter was epidemic because of low iodine,
we put iodine in wheat and salt, and that took care of it.
Now they're putting bromides into the wheat,
which actually antagonizes iodine,
it's worse than nothing.
And we're seeing another epidemic, I think,
of iodine deficiency coming again,
manifesting not only as goiter or thyroid problems,
but as breast cancer.
Because half of the iodine function is in the thyroid
roughly and the other half in breast tissue.
So if you see people with fibrocystic breast disease,
think low iodine.
The average Japanese woman eating a seaweed diet
gets 12,500 micrograms of iodine a day.
Americans are lucky to get 150.
Interesting.
That's just one example,
and that's one of hundreds of examples.
So the question is, "What vitamin tablet should I take?"
It's not good for people to take handfuls of stuff each day.
A very simple way to get outstanding support
is with a vitamin powder, my favorite is called
the Energy Revitalization System, one drink and one capsule
replaces 35 tablets of supplements a day,
and it's excellent for almost everybody in the country.
We give them solid nutritional support.
Another study we just finished was on ribose
at our research center, and that's a sugar,
but it's a healthy sugar made by the body.
If you think of deoxyribonucleic acid,
DNA, RNA, it helps the energy formation,
ATP, NADH, these things all made of ribose.
And not having enough ribose is one of the reasons
for deficiencies, so giving the ribose in our study
increased energy an average of 44%.
And this was in a population with fibromyalgia
and chronic fatigue syndrome.
So there's a lot of simple things you can do,
and pain went way down.
So there's many simple things you can do,
when you give your body nutrition and sleep,
that, by itself, is often enough to help the pain
get much better or go away.
What about alkalinity,
this is a new subject and it's a big one right now.
Nope, it's an old subject.
Well I mean, it's getting a big buzz right now.
Yeah, I've been in practice for 30 years,
I see the fashion trends come and go.
This is simply one of the many curves.
The problem with acid-base balance is
that we don't have a good test to determine
whether somebody is true alkaline or true basic.
What most doctors will do is they'll just check
what's called the blood gas, and everybody's going
to be seven point four.
But they forget the effect of stressing the buffer systems
on the body for the pH.
So basically, they say, "Well everybody's at a set pH,"
but they don't realize that you have to throw off
the breathing, or your metabolism to get that
and the effects of that.
So many people will go ahead and say,
"Okay, well let's do saliva pH and urine pH--"
Right, are those worth anything?
They're worth something, but I don't think
they're that reliable.
A much better way to tell is to have a highly alkaline diet
for two, three weeks, and then have a high
meat acidic diet for two, three weeks,
and see which way feels better.
One of the most important messages that people
can get is that your body tells you what it wants
by what feels good to you.
And now, you have to check not just right after
you take something, if you shoot up heroine
you're gonna feel better,
but the next day you're gonna feel like hell.
Well let's just say we're talking about
natural products you can consume.
Basically medications, natural things,
if it helps you feel better, it's probably good for you.
Well you have high sustained levels of energy,
your metabolic rate is good--
And you feel good.
You feel good.
Right, right.
It's kind of like,
people say, "Well what's the best size shoe
"for everybody to wear?"
Well I have a variability.
Whatever feels good.
So you try it on, if it's too small, you do a bigger one,
if it's too big, you do a smaller one, now it's just right.
You know what fits, you know what's good, there you are.
And the same with nutrients, I talk about the energy
revitalization system, it says a scoop a day,
but I do two thirds of a scoop a day,
half a scoop is plenty.
You take these things to the level that feels the best
to you, and that's how you know it's good for you.
So let's talk about some specific ailments
where people would end up running to their doctor
and maybe getting clubbed over the head with a hammer
with something that's overkill.
Let's start with migraines.
Oh migraines, it's really sad.
When I was on CNN a little while ago,
waiting to go on, they had this section about using surgery,
cutting out big face muscles to go ahead
and decrease migraines by 50%.
And I wanted to tell them, just 400 milligrams
of vitamin B2, riboflavin, decreases migraines
by 67% in repeat studies.
Magnesium, B12, you do those three together
and you're gonna cut your migraines back 75% to 90%.
You take food allergies, using NADT or other energy
type things, decrease migraines 80% to 90%.
Migraines are easy to prevent
when you treat the underlying problems.
What is usually the underlying problem?
Is it a deficiency of those nutrients, or?
It's a deficiency of energy production,
so you get spasm and dilation of the blood vessels.
It's triggered by muscle spasm.
People used to think it was only blood vessel dilation
verses tension headaches, which is in the neck muscles
and what's called the sternocleidomastoid
causing tension here, but we're realizing
that it's really a spectrum where one flows into the other.
So the whole SHIN thing we talked about, sleep,
hormone, infection, nutrition, fluctuations
in estrogen levels, drops in energy and serotonin,
there's many things--
What about digestion?
Well that's gonna cause nutritional deficiencies.
And let's talk about indigestion.
Well I was going to say,
the digestive connection to migraines
often times it seems to go together for people.
If you have poor digestion, you're more prone
to food allergies and nutritional deficiencies.
And if you think about it, acid blockers like, well,
I don't even want to give the names of the medications,
but the acid blockers used to be unnecessary.
And now they want to make believe that you have
too much stomach acid, but if you look at it,
the older people are, the more they need acid blockers,
and the older people are, the less stomach acid they make.
So it's not a matter of too much acid,
it's a matter of poor digestion.
If you look back several decades ago,
food processors learned that if you destroy
the enzymes in food, the enzymes are what ripen the food,
it'll have a very long shelf life.
If you have an ear of corn, shelf life five days,
corn flakes, shelf life five millennia.
So the problem is that food will look good,
but those same enzymes in the food
that ripen the food digest the food when you eat it.
So the food looks good, but becomes indigestible,
you get indigestion, any stomach acid hurts,
and you find yourself on acid blockers.
But think about it.
If you have poor digestion, and now you're turning
off your stomach acid, that makes your digestion even worse.
No symptoms, but you're not getting the nutrients
out of the food, and you're more prone to food allergies.
So a better thing would be if you used plant-based
digestive enzymes, animal-based ones don't work
because they don't work in the acidic environment
of the stomach.
But use plant-based enzymes, don't take iced liquids
with your meals, enzymes don't work at cold temperatures.
Between meals is fine, or, if you feel great,
don't worry about it.
But if you're sitting there popping acid blockers,
use warm liquids with your meals to increase
the activity of the enzymes.
Considering the nature of our Western diet
in particular, would you say that most people over a given
age such as 40 or 50 actually need additional enzymes?
I think most people would benefit from it,
in fact that would tease some people in the food industry
to set up packaging that actually,
when you open the packaging,
releases the enzymes back into the food.
So you have an indigestion-free food line.
Next best thing to having the food
growing in the sunshine and from healthy dirt.
Indeed, well we have to feed 257 million people plus,
and I give the food processors credit.
At Woodstock they talked about breakfast for 250,000,
they're doing 250 million every day.
They've got to do what they've got to do,
I'm not faulting them.
Certainly eating a whole food diet's gonna be
a healthier way to go, but not everybody can do that.
So the next best thing is, how do you make it easy?
So let's talk, okay, we talked about digestion
and migraines, what about inflammation-oriented
diseases such as arthritis?
Inflammation in general responds very well to fish oil,
'cause we talked about the lack
of omega-3's being inflammatory.
But you want fish oil that's mercury-free.
Eskimo Free, Nordic Naturals,
these are some very good brands.
In pregnancy, the most important deficiency is fish oil,
that's why people get postpartum depression.
But in inflammation you do that, but also,
if you look at herbals, willow bark, for example,
in head-on studies with Motrin have found their medications
were twice as effective.
And there are multiple studies showing the willow bark,
but the dosing is important, you wanna get the right dose.
Boswellia, or frankincense, 900 to 1000 milligrams a day,
very good anti-inflammatory, even helps colitis and asthma.
In one study decreased arthritis pain by over 80%
after eight weeks.
So you have natural things that are incredibly effective.
Glucosamine is very good for healing the joints
as would be MSM and chondroiten.
It was interesting, they recently had a study
that the NIH set up, and it's a funny thing,
because you have somebody who is in charge
of the complimentary medicine division,
who brags that he has absolutely no experience
with any natural remedies at all.
And study after study was set up with design flaws
that any first-year herbal student could have looked at
and said, "This study is designed to fail."
And then the study fails, and the funny thing is,
when they put the medicines in those same study,
even the medicines don't work.
So you look at the recent glucosamine study,
and for mild to moderate arthritis the Celebrex
was no more effective, statistically and clinically,
than the placebo.
The herbal, basically glucosamine chondroitin,
much more effective than the placebo.
And overall for the mild arthritis, 66 1/2% of people
improved with a natural, 70% with the medication,
but the overall pain reduction was more for the herbal.
So the herbal remedies, or I should say, glucosamine,
not quite an herbal, but natural remedies,
were much more effective overall than the Celebrex.
But the conclusion of the study and what the newspapers
picked up were, don't use the natural remedies,
they don't work, use Celebrex.
Now this boggles the mind until you realize
that 11 of the authors on the study were on the payroll
of drug companies that make pain medications.
And you look at the Motrin family of medications,
that's a three billion dollar a year industry,
of course we pay four billion dollars a year
to treat the hospitalizations caused
by side effects of the medication, Vioxx, Celebrex,
billions of dollars more, and over 100,000 heart attacks
and strokes, and these are devastating things.
So it's one thing for the media, not the media
but for the drug companies' employees
to want to go ahead and protect their benefactors,
but not at the cost of over 16,000 deaths
in the United States a year that are totally unnecessary.
And we, I mean, I think our audience
is pretty clear on how research is funded
in the pharmaceutical industry,
we don't even really need to go there.
And so, to basically, we were talking a moment ago
about inflammation, another element to all of this
is don't do the things that would aggravate
these problem, such as a very high acidic diet
in terms of the refined white foods, right,
eliminate those--
I'm gonna go back
to what I said before, there is no one diet for everybody.
There are some people that live on McDonalds
and smoke and drink and they're doing great.
And I'm gonna tell you, if somebody feels great,
leave them alone, it's working.
But if your body feels bad, if you're in pain,
it's telling you you need to make some changes.
And a good place to begin is with a healthy,
whole food diet, but again, some people need
a high meat diet, and some need a high vegetable diet,
it's not one size fits all.
Does anybody need a lot of sugar and white flour?
Yeah, I think some of the food processing companies
do to make the money.
Okay.
I was gonna say, I don't know of any bodies
that actually need that, as much
as we might enjoy a cupcake from time to time.
Yeah, in others, I don't want to take candy from children
or adults, and I tell people to cut out the sugar,
but I do add the three magic words, "except for chocolate."
Except for chocolate, of course.
And having said that, there's sugar-free chocolates
like Russell Stover, Godiva has a lot that tastes great,
others taste like cardboard.
So you wanna keep your pleasure--
A lot of really natural ones too.
but keep it in a way that are healthy, do a taste test.
So when we're in pain,
am I guessing that you would say, "Don't run to your doctor
first to have them fix it," is that a fair thing to say?
Well, let me tell you what most doctors--
And you are a doctor, I know that.
I'm a MD, I'm board-certified internist, let me tell you
what most doctors are taught about pain management.
They're taught, give Motrin or Vioxx family medications,
or Tylenol, and if they have cancer,
give them narcotics if you need to.
That's it.
If they're surgeons, they're taught to operate.
That's all your doctor has been taught about.
And when you talk about having the whole tool kit
to treat problems, prescriptions are like the hammer.
But all doctors have is that hammer,
prescription and surgery.
And that's the way everybody walks out of their office
feeling like they've been nailed.
And when you have the whole tool kit,
you have the screwdriver and the pliers and the wrenches,
you have all the natural things,
now you can go ahead and heal people.
And I don't want to get rid of the hammer,
there's times, 'cause I do comprehensive medicine,
I'll use prescription, but a lot that are much safer
than the unsafe, like Motrin stuff.
But go with natural things first, they're more effective
and they're safer.
For each kind of problem, disc disease for example.
I almost never had to send somebody for surgery
'cause you take an old herb that's been turned
into a medication called colchicine, it's decades old.
We give six injections, IV once a week for six weeks
along with a nutritional IV.
And in the studies of over 3000 patients,
over 70% of people's disc pain will be gone by six weeks.
When you add the nutritional IV our experience is over 90%.
But there's a big problem with the IV treatment.
The problem is that the entire cost of the six doses
of colchicine is $18, plus the cost of starting the IV.
Surgery is $27,000.
Which one do you think your doctor is gonna learn about?
And then you look at carpal tunnel syndrome.
You don't need surgery.
Most people find vitamin B6, 250 milligrams,
a wrist splint that keeps your hand in a neutral position,
like holding a glass of water,
that kind of neutral position at night,
and often a little bit of prescription natural thyroid.
Almost always gets rid of carpal tunnel syndrome
unless the person has con-tin-der-en-dro-ped-i-gal
repetitive stress injury.
So you don't need surgery for these things
but if I was a back surgeon and somebody came along
and said, "Look at these studies of thousands of patients,
"IV colchicine gets them better, isn't that great?"
"What did you say?
"I didn't hear anything."
Excuse me.
What? (laughing)
I didn't hear that, I can't hear you.
Exactly they can't hear you.
Yeah, I know they can't, yeah.
And again, I don't blame them for that.
I mean, I remember I used to do heart monitors
as an internist, and I thought I was doing great good
on the planet and helping prevent people from dying,
and I was also making 250 bucks a pop
for five minutes' work.
I'd at least have somebody out of dizziness and fluttering,
and need a heart monitor.
A lot of motivation
there.
Ca-ching, it was great.
And when the studies came out showing they were largely
a waste of time, I didn't want to look at them either.
So it's not that they're bad people, it's just human nature.
And that's why the consumer needs
to look out for themselves and really do their homework.
Well, thank you so much, and just,
I guess, was it your own pain that really drove you
into starting to understand the underlying causes?
And my empathy and compassion.
I really, I tend to be fairly empathic.
I've been there, I know what people feel like
when they're having it, and I know that pretty much
everybody can get pain free.
Plus I wrote the book Pain Free, 1-2-3.
One, two, three.
Came out last month
under McGraw Hill, it will give you literally hundreds
of natural prescription therapies tailored to the type
of pain you have and it'll show you how to figure out
which are the best ones to use in your case.
Wonderful, and we'll have that on the site
so people can get right to it.
That'll be great.
Thank you so much
for your time.
My pleasure.
If you have chosen to be well and stay well,
you'll also enjoy our interview with Dr. Lorraine Day.
Dr. Day reversed her N-stage cancer by turning
to a prescription in the Old Testament
for eliminating disease from our lives.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(futuristic music)